
The system is started by: svali.exe svali.dmp

1. svali supports different kinds of windows. 
   a. counting based windows
      function:
	svali:winagg(Stream s, Integer size, Integer slide) -> Stream of Window
      description:
	takes stream of events (objects) and the size of window and the slide as auguments
	returns stream of windows
      note:
	the sliding size should never be greater than the size of the window
	when size == slide, the windows created are tumbling windows.
      example:
	see documentation.osql, part 1
   
   b. time based windows
      function:
	svali:twinagg(Stream s, Function ts, Integer size, Integer slide) -> Stream of Window
      description:
	the function ts should have the following signature: ts(Object o) -> Number
      note:
	currently time stamps are represented as numbers
      example:
	see documentation.osql, part 2

   c. predicate based windows
      function:
	svali:pinagg(Stream s, Function startf, Function stopf) -> Stream of Window
      description:
	the predicate in the most general case are functions with the signature:
	    startf(Object o) -> Object res
	    stopf(Object res, Object o) -> Boolean
      note:
	both start and stop predicates are user defined.
	stop function takes both THE RESULT FROM STARTF and THE EVENT IN THE STREAM as arguments
      example:
	see documentation.osql, part 3


2. svali supports two validation scenarios
   a. Model based validation: Manually define (mathematical) model and then use that model to validate.
      function:
	svali:validate(Stream s, Function invalidf, Number interval) ->
			  Stream of (Number ts, Number measured, Number expected, Number invalid)
      description:
	the mathematical model is expressed in amosql function invalidf with the signature:
	    invalidf(Object r, Number interval) -> 
		(Number ts, Number measured, Number expected, Number invalid)
	it takes the event in the stream and the threshold as arguments. It returns a tuple of
	time stamps, measured value, expected value and a flag indicating whether the event is valid or not
      extension:
	logging are also supported:
	   svali:validate_log(Stream s, Function invalidf, Number interval,
	   		  Charstring logfile,Charstring mode) ->
		Stream of (Number ts, Number measured, Number expected, Number invalid)
	with log file, we can replay the validation off line
	   svali:replay(Charstring logfile, Function invalidf, Number interval) ->
	   	Stream of (Number ts, Number measured, Number expected, Number invalid)
      example:
	see documentation.osql, part 4

   b. Recording based validaton: First several events (sub stream) in the stream are recorded to
      build the validation model from the substream (learning)
      and then validate.
      function:
	svali:p_record_n_validate(Stream s, Function startf, Function stopf, Function recordf,
			  Integer recordn, Function validatef, Number threshold)
			  	  	   	    	       -> Stream of (Integer, Vector)
      description:
	s,	      the stream to be validated
	startf 	      start predicate for creating windows
	stopf	      stop predicate for creating windows
	recordf	      record functions with the following signature
		      	     recordf(Vector of Vector of Object vvo) -> Vector of Obejct
		      the parameter vvo is first n windows of the stream s represented in 2-d arrays
		      return value is the built model (reference)
	recordn	      indicates recording the first n in the stream s
	validatef     validation functions to validate the stream s
		      		 validatef(Vector reference, Vector v, Number threshold)
				 -> (Integer, Vector)
		      it takes the model (reference) and the orignal v and threshold
		      returns tuple of a flag indicates if v is valid or not and the orginal v
	threshold     parameter for validatef
      note:
	The function is predicate based, which is needed for the drilling scenarion.
        From the raw data, it first forms windows for each drill and then builds a reference drilling 
        window by apply recordf on the first recordn windows. 

	In the most general case, the function should look like this:
	   svali:record_n_validate(Stream s, Function recordf, Integer recordn,
	   		     Function validatef, Number threshold)
	  	   	    	       -> Stream of (Integer, Object)
	svali:p_record_n_validate uses pinagg internally to form the stream sent to record_n_validate.
      example:
	see documentation.osql part 5


3. window based processing
   3.1 window average
       Function:
	window_average(Window w, Function accessor, Vector arg) -> Number
       	window_average(Window, Function accessor) -> Number
       Description:
	The function is overloaded depending on how many arguments the access function takes.
   3.2 ordinary least squares
       Function:
	ols_a_of_window_v(Window w) -> Number
       Description:
	returns the slope of the window
       Note:
	This is only for windows of 2-d vectors of number
