How neurogenerator works.

source files: neuro/bin/Makefiles

The neurogenerator wrapper uses the relational wrapper to migrate data stored
in Amos to a relational database, while maintaining totally transparent access
to these data using an enhanced relational wrapper.

The process consists of four steps:

Step 1:

The original schema is loaded into Amos as is and stored as a separate .dmp 
file.

Step 2 - schema export :

source files: wrappers/relational/export-type.lsp
	      wrappers/relational/exportlog.lsp
              neuro/bin/neuroexport.osql

created files: ng.gdb - The database file
	       log.osql - The file that imports it back in
	       sqllog.osql - A log file containing all the sql statements that
			     were executed during schema creation

The .dmp file from Step 1 is loaded (and some patches applied) and a 
file neuroexport.osql is loaded and its content executed. This file is 
hand-turned but it could easily be auto-generated. In fact, it contains
only two statements:

     * a call to export_types
     This is the one function that does the real work in the neurogenerator
     exportation. All other steps taken simply reap the rewards. For now, we
     will note that the function takes as arguments a datasource object and
     a vector of charstring to hold the names of the types.

     * a disconnect statement.

The export function creates two log files, one which is a true log of all the 
activity in the relational database and one which is not really a log file, 
but it poses as a log to the export function. If Lisp were object-oriented 
there would be an interface called exportlog that registers in the exporter, 
and the code in exportlog would be class implementing that interface (almost 
like an action listener in Java) and this particular export log would be 
creating a very useful textfile, namely a batch of AmosQL commands for 
importing the tables back in Amos, this time around as mapped types rather 
than proprietary types although the functionality remains EXACTLY THE SAME.

There are several twists to the above approach. First of all one wants the 
migration to be transparent to the point that types and functions have the 
same names, which has the consequence that the old type must be deleted before
the table can be imported (two types cannot have the same name, obviously.) So
what is desired is in essence a file containing a set of commands

  delete type <x>
  import_table(ds, <at_x>, <x>);

The file should normally not contain stored function definitions as these are 
supposed to be 'encoded' in the database as columns, tables, and key 
references. See section 'How Exportation Is Done' for details on this.

A problem arises with non-stored functions, they are all deleted as the types
that they are defined for perish. These functions are referred to as
'endangered functions' and the are put on an 'endangered function' list. They
are recorded with the function exportlog-report-endangeredfn in exportlog.lsp. 
The endangered functions' definitinitions are included verbatim in the file 
log.osql. Thanks to Amos's habit of recording the source text of all functions
this was a piece of cake to implement.

Step 3 - A change of schema:

source files: wrappers/amosexport/amosexport.lsp 
              wrappers/amosexport/amosexport.osql

This step is a very simple one. All the work was done in step 2. All we do is
start up with the previous dump, load up log.osql and save again. As a 
bootstrap the table userobject is imported. This is the table that is
'supertype' of all other tables in the database, and the only one which gets
the suffix '_ibds'; in order to distinguish it from the Amos type userobject.

Note also that the datasource this time is not relational. This is because the
datasource relational lacks the ability to answer questions such as 'which is
the subtype of this type?'. The type relational is simply not equipped to do
this. Even though the information is clearly there, you need someone to 
interpret it. That's where the new wrapper comes into play. The wrapper 
(and type) AmosExport extends JDBC by adding functions such as most_specific 
type and rehacks the _decode_ function in order to deal with polymorhpism. 
This is where we really push the envelope of what Amos is really capable of 
doing. Of course, in order to REALLY add these features to Amos, there are
some novel aspects that need implementation. I won't go into detail but I 
might just drop 'multidirectional derived functions'. The basic assumption has
always been that if you issue a

SELECT e FROM employee e;

all you will ever get are employee objects, regardless of what their type 
really is. Since _decode_ creates object and types them based solely on which
word comes after FROM, we cannot have total object-orientation. What exists 
for AmosExport is a workaround that does not easily integrate into Amos. 
Basically the new _decode_ must, before creating an object, ask the datasource
what type the object REALLY is. This is slow, yes, and the design speeds this 
up somewhat byadding an extra column (VARCHAR ORIGINAL_TYPE_NAME) in the 
table USEROBJECT which contains the name of the table which corresponds to 
the most specific type of the object. It's not a perfect design but hey, it 
works!

I know the design of JDBC and AmosExport is kind of sketchy - AmosExport 
extends JDBC when really it should be the other way around. This is due to a
much older design mistake - that JDBC be under Relational. This is not
a good design: You can't say that JDBC is_a Relational. Relational is the 
translator and the import facilities. JDBC is strictly an interface and a 
driver, just like ODBC or what have you. It's nothing but the classical is/has
confusion. Relational HAS an interface, not that an interface IS Relational.
So the way the hierarchy should be done is this:


              Datasource        Interface
               ^    ^                 ^
              /      \        1       |
  ObjectEnhanced   Relational<---RelationalInterface
             ^       ^            ^      ^     ^
              \     /            /        \     \
             AmosExport         JDBC      ODBC   ...


step 4 - population:

source files: wrappers/amosexport/new_external-to-mapped.lsp
	      wrappers/relational/new-object.lsp	



Most of the stuff that goes on in population is none of my business, it's a 
lot of calculations on overlap volumes, conversion between file formats and 
stuff but at the very heart of population lies the function new_object, which 
takes a (former) oid number and a type name and creates an object. In the 
normal Amos world this simply executes a CREATE statement but we're not in 
Kansas anymore.

What happens is this:

  * first a new unique integer is produced.
  
  * The table corresponding to the type is updated with a new row containing 
  the number

  * The FOREIGN KEY references are followed and all of those tables updated
  similarily with the same row. Hopefully the branches merge att USEROBJECT
  where the column ORIGINAL_TYPE_NAME is updated with the name of the first 
  table.

I guess the last step could be solved by using cascaded updates but that would
be one more feature that you would depend upon in the database. This way we 
have complete control.

Of course nowadays when we have transparent constructors the whole idea of
new_object is somewhat superfluous. If I had the time I'd create a dedicated
constructor for mapped AmosExport objects that does the above job and I 
woldn't have to redefine anything.

step 5 - starting up.

In step 5 everything is done and all you have to do is enable java, load the 
JDBC driver, connect and it should all be there.

How Exportation Is Done:

- Types to tables   

Every type in Amos can be implemented as a table in a relational database. 
It is very simple to verify this so that is how it's done. The problem is that
a table without columns is not allowed in SQL, whereas a type in Amos without
properties will exist perfectly fine. On the other hand, there IS one thing 
that all instances of a type share : the OID number. This number also happens
to be globally unique (for a given Amos, that is). So here we have a great
canditade key for any amos type. The column OID INTEGER is the primary key for
every table that corresponds to a type.

- Inheritance

There are several ways to deal with inheritance in a relational database. 
There is the possibility of BOOLEAN valued columns to indicate possible 
membership of subtypes, for example a table PERSON might have a column called
IS_STUDENT, a column called GPA and a trigger to ensure that whenever 
IS_STUDENT is true, GPA is not NULL. But it seemed less appealing.

What I chose was an approach which more closely resembles the way that 
object-oriented programming languages implement type membership. In C++, for
instance, an object of a certain type always contains (a pointer to) an
instance of the object's supertype. Whenever a propery (function or field) is 
needed, the object's own context is scanned and of nothing is found the search
follows the pointer to the supertype's object and so on.

So in essence whenever you create an object of a certain type you actually
invoke a 'chain reaction' creating objects of all successive supertypes 
until you reach some almighty supertype at the top of the food chain. This is
a very simple model and the concept is easy to grasp (At least I think so.)
So all I had to do was to find a way to translate this into SQL. The following
'mappings' proved fruitful:

  * types <-> tables
 
  * instances <-> rows

  * pointers <-> foreign keys

  * object identity <-> the primary key column of the object's row

The consequences are obvious: For example a table PERSON will have the columns
(OID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, SSN INTEGER, NAME CHAR[n], ...) and a table STUDENT
will have (OID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY REFERENCES PERSON, GPA FLOAT, ...).
Thus the student will always reference a PERSON instance and the two rows 
together (an equijoin over OID) will yield all properties of the student.

In SQL it is also possible to ensure consistency by using cascaded deletion
and insertion, which I strongly recommend. One does not want a STUDENT who is
not a PERSON.

- Non-literal types as function results

It is easy in Amos to create functions that return objects of any type, 
indeed, it is done the exact same way as returning anything else. This is not 
the case in SQL, where a column can only continue the built-in types that 
came with the database in question. There is no such thing as a user-created 
type. In order to create mapping between such entities a relational database 
frequently employs foreign keys. An EMPLOYEE's social security number can 
easily be implemented as an INTEGER column. The employee's boss, however 
needs to be dealt with in a different manner. What is usually done is that 
you create a table MANAGER with some primary key, say emp_no, and then add 
column (INTEGER MANAGER REFERENCES MANAGER.EMP_NO), using a foreign key to 
indicate that this particular integer matches a manager entity.

The above taken into account, we can observe the following:

  * non-literal property types (function result/argument types) 
  are foreign keys

The approach is greatly simplified by the previous decision to use the same
column OID as the primary key for all tables. So any function of the kind

  foo(person) -> department

will be implemented in SQL as:

     person				
      _OID_INTEGER_| FOO INTEGER REFERENCES DEPARTMENT.OID
       ------------+--------------------------------------

     department
      _OID_INTEGER_| ...
       ------------+------
 
And the implementation of foo is 

  foo(person p)->integer department ...(automatically created by import_table)

  foo(person p) -> department d
  as select d where _decode_(d) = foo(department(p));

- Bags

A function in Amos can return either a bag of someting 
(a key->nonkey function) or a single result (key->key), or any combination of 
key/nonkey. This is a very great generalization from the relational model 
where one-to-one and one-to-many relationships have to be treated with 
totally different strategies, creating enourmous implementation overhead.

The usual drill is to create a special table with two columns, both of which 
have foreign keys pointing to the enitities which should be related, or if
one 'entity' is a literal type, the literal value itself can be inserted.

Remember that such tables do not correspond to a type, and should not be 
mistaken for types. And they should definitely not be imported with 
import_table!

- Naming conventions

A lot of work goes into resolving naming conflicts between SQL and Amos.
Certain names are reserved and this is (probably) not standardized across
platforms. The hopefully bullet-proof naming convention is
	   
  * types exported to tables are prepended with at_ (Amos Type)

  * function exported to tables are prepended with af_ (Amos Function)

  * A list is of reserved SQL words is maintaintained in (export-type.lsp)
    _sql-reserved-words_. Words on that list are appended with a dangling _

A lot of times you will see functions created like

create function file(X x)->Y y as select file_(x);

This is because file is a reserved word in SQL, so the column had to be named
file_ and the function file_ was automatically created during import.